Plant Protein Classification using K-mer Encoding

            A Report submitted
in partial fulfillment of the requirement

       for the award of a Degree of

Bachelor of Technology

in

Computer Science and Engineering

                                         by  S. Pranitha Reddy
                                              (2019BCSE032)
M. Pravallika Devi
(2019BCSE039)

Under the guidance of

Dr. Veningston K

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
     National Institute of Technology, Srinagar,
                Kashmir 190006, INDIA
                          June 2023
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

II Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                        CERTIFICATE

This is to certify that the project report entitled Plant Protein Classification
using K-mer Encoding submitted by Pravallika Devi M (2019BCSE039)
and Pranitha Reddy S (2019BCSE032) to the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology Srinagar,
Kashmir, in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree of B.Tech in
Computer Science and Engineering is a bona fide record of project work
carried out by them under my supervision.

Dr. Veningston K
Supervisor
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
National Institute of Technology Srinagar

      III Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
           Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

IV Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
     Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                 STUDENT DECLARATION

We declare that this project report titled Plant Protein Classification using
K-Mer Encoding submitted in partial fulfillment of the degree of B.Tech in
Computer Science and Engineering is a record of original work carried out
by us under the supervision of Dr. Veningston K. The matter embodied in
this project, in full or in parts, have not been submitted to any other
Institution or University for the award of any degree or diploma. We also
declare that the work submitted by us is entirely original, free from
plagiarism, and has been diligently checked through Turnitin software to
ensure its authenticity.

Pravallika Devi M  Pranitha Reddy S
2019BCSE039         2019BCSE032

Srinagar, 190006
13-06-2023

V Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

VI Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
     Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We consider it as our privilege to express gratitude and respect to all those who
guided and inspired us in the completion of our B.Tech project. First of all, we
would like to acknowledge and extend our heartfelt gratitude to our guide, Dr.
Veningston, Assistant Professor at the Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Srinagar for his valuable guidance,
constant encouragement, and kind help at various stages for the execution of this
dissertation work. An erudite teacher, a magnificent person, and a strict
disciplinarian, we consider our self fortunate to have worked under his
supervision.
We would also like to express our sincere thanks to the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering at NIT Srinagar for providing us with this opportunity to
work on this important project.
We also place on record our sense of gratitude to one and all, who directly or
indirectly, have lent their hand in this venture.

                                                                             Pravallika Devi M
                                                                              Pranitha Reddy S

     VII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
           Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

VIII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
       Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                           ABSTRACT

Proteins play an important role in human body and in plants. Lack of expertise in
protein labeling in plants can make it extremely difficult to characterize and
comprehend the precise roles and activities of different proteins. Furthermore, it
restricts development in fields like biotechnology , disease resistance, and crop
enhancement.
The presented project focuses on plant protein classification, aiming to overcome
the challenges arising from limited protein labeling knowledge. Advanced
machine learning techniques, including various classification algorithms such as
Logistic Regression, Decision Tree, K-nearest neighbors (KNN), Support Vector
Machines (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Multinomial Naive Bayes (NB),
AdaBoost, and XGBoost, are employed to accurately classify protein sequences
into their respective families. This classification approach provides valuable
insights into the functions and roles of proteins within plants, ultimately
advancing our understanding of plant biology. This attempt offers new
possibilities for advancement in critical sectors such as agriculture, drug discovery,
and genomic research by eliminating the limitations associated with limited
protein labeling knowledge.

      IX Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
           Technology Srinagar
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

X Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DESCRIPTION                                PAGE NUMBER

CERTIFICATE                                                iii
DECLARATION                                                v
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                           vii
ABSTRACT                                                    ix
LIST OF FIGURES                                             xiii
LIST OF TABLES                                              xv
ABBREVIATIONS/ NOTATIONS/ NOMENCLATURE                      xvii
                                                            1
  1. INTRODUCTION                                           1
         1.1 Overview                                       2
                1.1.1 Gene Expression                       4
                1.1.2 Genome Annotation                      7

  2. LITERATURE SURVEY                                       19
  3. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY                                    19
                                                             19
         3.1 Problem Statement                               22
         3.2 Dataset Description                            22
         3.3 Detailed Architecture                          26
                                                            27
                3.3.1 Dataset Preparation                   33
         3.4 K-mer Encoding
         3.5 Algorithms Used
  4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

XI Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
     Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

4.1 Evaluation Metrics                                                     33

4.1.1 Confusion Matrix                                                     33

4.1.2 Accuracy                                                             33

4.1.3 Precision                                                            33

4.1.4 Recall                                                               33

4.1.5 F1-score                                                             34

4.2 Experimental Evaluation using Entire Dataset

                   ( using 34 classes)                                     34

4.3 Divided Datasets Evaluation                                            38

5. CONCLUSION and FUTURE WORKS                                             47

REFERENCES                                                                 49

Appendix A Output                                                          53

XII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
        PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

        LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE  TITLE                                      PAGE NUMBER
1.1
1.2.    DNA Structure                              2
1.3.
1.4.    Central Dogma                              3
3.1.
3.2.    Genome Annotation                          4
3.3.
3.4.    General Architecture                       5
3.5.
3.6.    Plant GDB - Homepage                       20
3.7.
4.1.    Peach Genome                               20
4.2.
4.3.    Detailed Workflow                          21
4.4.
4.5.    peptide File Conversion (.fa to .csv)      22
4.6.
4.7.    Annotation File Conversion (.txt to .csv)  23
4.27.
        Final Dataset (filtered_data.csv)          23

        4-mer representation                       26

        Evaluation metric scores of all models     34

        Confusion Matrix of all classes            37

        Accuracy plots [D1] [D2]                   38

        Precision plots [D1] [D2]                     39

        Recall plots [D1][D2]                         39

        F1-score plots [D1][D2]                       40

        Confusion Matrix of all classes [D1]          41

        Confusion Matrix of all classes [D2]          44

XIII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

XIV Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
       Technology Srinagar
       PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

       LIST OF TABLES

TABLE                     TITLE        PAGE NUMBER
2.1    Summary of Literature Survey                    14
3.1.   Class Label Description                          24
3.2.   Sequence Encoding Methods                        26
4.1.   Evaluation Metric Results                        45
4.2.   Evaluation Metric Results - D1                   45
4.3.   Evaluation Metric Results - D2                   45

XV Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

XVI Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
       Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

 ABBREVIATIONS/NOTATIONS/NOMENCLATURE

Abbrevations

AdaBoost - Adaptive Boosting
BOW - Bag of Words
DNA - Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DT - Decision Tree
FN - False Negative
FP - False Positive
KNN - K Nearest Neighbor
LR - Logistic Regression
mRNA - Messenger Ribonucleic Acid
Multinomial NB - Multinomial Naive Bayes
PlantGDB - Plant Genome Database
RF - Random Forest
RNA - Ribonucleic Acid
SVM - Support Vector Machine
TN - True Negative
TP - True Positive
tRNA - Transfer Ribonucleic Acid
XGBoost - Extreme Gradient Boosting

   XVII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
           Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Notations

A - Adenine
T - Thymine
G - Guanine
C - Cytosine
U - Uracil

Biological Nomenclature

Prunus persica - peach

   XVIII Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
           Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                            CHAPTER 1

                        INTRODUCTION

1.1 Overview

Proteins are macromolecules that play crucial roles in the body. They are used to
structure the body's organs and help in regulation and body functioning. They
composed of hundreds of amino acids that are covalently connected to each other.
There are amino acids of 20 types, and the sequence predicts the protein's 3D
structure and corresponding function. Combining three nucleotide bases (`A',' T',' G',
and' C') results in coded amino acids.

Proteins play crucial role in plant growth and development. They provide a variety of
functions, including photosynthesis, biosynthesis, transportation, immunology, etc. A
diverse range of proteins, including enzymes, structural proteins, and storage proteins,
are produced by plants.

     Enzymes ­ Act as catalysts and are crucial for plant metabolism.
     Structural Proteins ­ Provides support and shape to plant cells.
     Storage proteins ­ Stores amino acids for later use.

DNA is a macromolecule composed of two polynucleotide chains that forms double
helix structure by coiling around each other as shown in fig 1.1. It carries the genetic
code, which is essential for all living things,to develop, function, grow, and reproduce.
The two DNA strands are made up of nucleotides further referred to as
polynucleotides. Each nucleotide is made up of a phosphate group, a deoxyribose
sugar, and one of the four nitrogen-containing nucleobases (A,T,G and C).

       1 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Since more than 98% of human DNA is non-coding, it cannot serve as a guide for the
construction of protein sequences. Due to the fact that they move in the opposing
directions, the two DNA strands are antiparallel. Transcription is the process of
converting DNA nucleotides into RNA strands, with the exception of thymine (T), for
which RNA substitutes uracil (U). Translation is the process by which these RNA
strands use the genetic instructions to direct the arrangement of amino acids in
proteins.

                       Fig 1.1 DNA Structure

1.1.1 Gene Expression

The genetic information of a cell is stored in DNA or RNA chemical form.

 A Gene is a Portion of a DNA molecule.
 The Genome is the entire DNA in a cell.

Each cell has a complex and closely controlled process from gene to protein.
Transcription and translation are the two main phases. Transcription and translation
work together to produce gene expression.

2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023
The information contained in a gene's DNA is transferred to a similar molecule called
RNA (ribonucleic acid) in the cell nucleus during the transcription process. Since
messenger RNA (mRNA) transmits information from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, it
is this type of RNA that contains the instructions needed to make a protein.

The cell wall is where translation, the second step in turning a gene into a protein,
takes place. The ribosome and the mRNA interact, and the ribosome "reads" the
nucleotide sequence of the mRNA. Three nucleotide sequences make up a codon,
which typically codes for one amino acid. One amino acid at a time, transfer RNA
(tRNA), a kind of RNA, assembles the protein. Until the ribosome encounters a
"stop" codon (a three-nucleotide sequence that does not code for an amino acid),
protein production continues.

The transmission of information from DNA through RNA to proteins is one of the
fundamental ideas in molecular biology ("central dogma").

                                          Fig 1.2 Central Dogma

       3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

1.1.2 Genome Annotation

Giving the sequence of the genome is never enough we need to know which part of
the genome is coding and which part is non-coding. Here comes Genome Annotation,
which is the process of describing the structure and function of a genome. Gene
sequencing is the process of determining the nucleic acid sequence, or the
arrangement of the nucleotides in DNA.

Annotating a genome consists of three major steps:

     Identifying the genome regions that do not contain protein-coding genes.
     Gene Prediction - Process of identifying genome elements.
     Linking biological information to the elements

                     Genome

                             Gene Sequencing

DNA                  Genome

     A T T G T A C CGenGe SeTquenAcingC C G A

DNA  Coding          Non - Coding

     A T T G T A C C G T A C C GA

     Which Protein?  Non - Coding
         Coding

                     Fig 1.3 Genome Annotation

     4 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
            PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023
                                        Dataset Collection
                                         Dataset Preparation

                                Data Labelling and Pre-processing
                                               Training
                                                 Testing

                                          Optimizing Results
                                          Results Comparison

                                                Outcome
                                      Fig 1.4 General Architecture
5 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
            PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

6 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
    Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                            CHAPTER 2

                    LITERATURE SURVEY

1. Protein classification using genome neighborhood.

This researcher created a computational strategy employing machine learning (ML)
and genomic neighborhood information to find photosynthetic protein and taken
UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot database [12]. Genome neighborhood network (GNN)
outperformed Random forest, decision tree methods with an accuracy of 87%. As
evidence of the model's potential to increase photosynthetic efficiency, it also showed
its capacity to recognize novel photosynthetic proteins. The key outcome of this is the
functional relationship between the neighbors of photosynthetic genes.

2. k-mer - HIV - 1 Genome Subtyping

The study focuses on the classification of virus subtypes, notably within HIV-1. To
address this issue, the researchers suggest using an open-source technique called
Kameris, which classifies HIV-1 subtypes based on k-mer frequencies [17]. Kameris
outperformed other evaluated software, achieving a high accuracy of 97% while
processing more than 1,500 sequences per second. 15 classifiers were trained during
supervised classification utilizing k-mer frequencies as feature vectors. SVM, LR,
decision trees, and RF were utilized. The effectiveness of the categorization process
was evaluated using cross-validation. The technique calculated pairwise distances
between sequences based on their k-mer frequencies.

3. Evaluating Plant Gene Models Using ML

Truegene is an ml approach developedfor gene models classification and reduce false
positive annotations in gene prediction [4]. The Legume Information System (LIS)
provided the Pisum annotated gene and protein dataset. The NCBI NR database was

       7 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

compared to the annotated genes. It makes use of 41 protein-based traits, including
amino acid and nucleotide sequences, and 14 genes. The Pisum genome was used for
XGBoost model training, which resulted in optimized models with 87-90% prediction
accuracy and F-1 scores of 0.91-0.94.

4. LTR retrotransposons Classification using K-mer method

Although LTR retrotransposons are prevalent repeating sequences in plant genomes,
the classification often involve laborious, manual procedures [7]. To overcome the
problem, the researchers created a technique for classifying LTR retrotransposons
and mapping them into certain families using K-mer based ML algorithms. They used
InpactorDB, which contains 67,241 LTR retrotransposon sequences from 195 plant
species that have been systematically categorized into families. This dataset included
sequences from Repbase, RepetDB, and PGSB. Their approach achieved an
impressive of 95% F1-Score.

5. Classification of plant transcription factor proteins

Science still faces difficulties in categorizing amino acid sequences and
comprehending the connection between amino acids and protein synthesis. To
categorize the amino acid sequences of unidentified species, this study develops a
hybrid DLM that makes use of the plant transcription factor database [1]. The model
successfully classified transcription factor proteins in the kingdom of plants with a
high success rate of 98.23% throughout tests. The hybrid model performs better than
traditional LSTM- or CNN-based models due to its lightweight layers and shorter
training time. The success of the suggested model is further increased by the usage of
Word2Vec vectors.

6. Plant vacuole protein prediction based on sequence

Prediction of subcellular localization is essential for comprehending gene functions
in proteomes. This study addresses this issue by developing various compositions and

       8 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

PSSM-based models, resulting in improved accuracy compared to previous methods
[13]. They used UniportKB/SwissProt database. The best model achieved
approximately 63% accuracy on a blind dataset, surpassing current tools. To make the
models accessible, they developed `VacPred' [GUI based software], compatible with
Windows and Linux platforms. They got an accuracy of 86.49%/87.84% and a
sensitivity of 90.54%/93.24%.

7. Protein Sequence Classification in Human using ML methods

Various methods, including sequence similarity and ML approaches, have been used
for protein function prediction. Swiss-Prot is the dataset (reviewed), whereas
TrEMBL is unreviewed [15]. There are 559228 proteins in the reviewed data set and
146106279 in the unreviewed dataset. This article compares six classification
techniques (CART, Quick unbiased Efficient Statistical Tree, CHAID, C5.0, ANN,
and SVM) and finds that C5.0 and SVM methods outperformed with an accuracy
above 94%. The researchers analyzed a dataset of 4,314 proteins, each with 1,438
features.

8. DNA Sequence Classification in ML: K Mer Counting

In genomic research, DNA sequences need to be classified to determine the
applicability of a new protein . This study utilizes machine learning algorithms to
identify classes of DNA sequences based on nucleotide sequences [5]. Open DNA
sequence dataset was used to obtain the gene sequence dataset. Different datasets
representing gene families are analyzed using substrings of defined lengths
(determined by the 'k value') to capture sequence patterns. When they took the human
dataset k=6 they obtained the best accuracy 98.4%, and Precision 98.4%. The
researchers obtained a gene sequence dataset from Kaggle containing three text files:
chimpanzee, dog, and human.

       9 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

9. Plant Protein Classification using Ensemble Classifiers

The method for forecast the subcellular localization using several classifiers is
enhanced in this research. The authors suggested an ensemble ML approach based on
average voting [8]. The dataset for testing and training was obtained from Plant-
mSubP. They gather different features appropriate for each sort of localization, use
feature selection to lessen dimensionality, and then train three different models.
According to experimental findings, using the testing dataset, the suggested ensemble
technique could correctly classify objects in 11 compartments with an accuracy of
84.58%.

10. DNA Sequencing Using ML Algorithms

DNA sequencing is an essential technique for discovering a person's genetic makeup
and comprehending variations and mutations linked to genetic illnesses [6]. This data
aids in understanding the patient's health status and aids in the planning of potential
treatments for the patient. In this research, DNA is sequenced using a human dataset
utilizing ML approaches like SVM, CNN, LSTM, RF, AdaBoost, Naive Bayes, and
K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN). Finally, the LSTM model performed the best with a
test accuracy of 99.5%.

11. Plant electrical signal classification using NN model.

Graph neural network model called PMESP was proposed in this study to discover
electrical signal-related proteins. GNN model constructs a graph structure for
visualizing protein interaction relationships and utilizes a Bi-LSTM for electrical
signal feature extraction [2]. They used CNN model to predict proteins and a
convolutional encoder for link prediction. They designed a dataset named PesPPI
which comprises of 23,214 PPIs pairs and 3600 nodes. As shown by the results, the
values of the model's AUC curve and the ROC curve are 96.24% and 96.84%, which
gave better performance results than earlier techniques.

      10 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

12. Accuracy Prediction of a sample DNA Sequence Dataset

The article analyses the development of DNA sequencing approaches and contrasts
current methods with earlier ones. The importance of DNA as the blueprint for life
and its critical function in the growth and survival of all creatures are emphasized [6].
They used a set of exploratory datasets. It comprises of seven gene families and three
organisms: humans, chimpanzees, and dogs. DNA sequencing has advanced
significantly as a result of the quick rise in data generation. The New-Age DNA
sequencing methods are significantly more effective than the older methods. They
got 98.4% accuracy. Additionally, the promise of machine learning is highlighted,
particularly when utilizing a Multinomial Naive Bayes classifier to predict DNA
sequences.

13. DNA Sequence Classification using CNN

The classification of DNA sequences within the framework of the analysis of
biomedical data was the study's main focus. The researchers used deep learning (DL)
models, which have the ability to automatically extract pertinent features from the
input data, to address this difficulty [9]. They specifically used three different
architectures: CNN-LSTM, CNN-Bi LSTM, and CNN-Convolutional Neural
Network (CNN). Both Label encoding and K-mer encoding strategies are used for
representing the DNA sequences. When the models were tested using a variety of
classification criteria, the CNN and CNN-Bi LSTM with K-mer encoding both
demonstrated good accuracy, scoring 93.16% and 93.13% on the testing data.

14. K-mer - Fixed-length DNA sequencing

By using k-mer frequency and subsequences commencing at certain places as
categorical features, the algorithm for categorizing fixed-length DNA sequences
performed well [5]. They chose the datasets from the UCI ML Repository, Promoter,
and Splice. Four models namely iNuc-PseKNC, iNuc-PseSTNC, 3LS and TNS were

      11 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

used. K-mer method used in generatin fixed-length vectors. In the human dataset, the
prediction Accuracy is 86.33%.

15. Prediction of Hormone-Binding Proteins using NB

In order to correctly identify hormone-binding proteins (HBPs), a prediction model
dubbed HBP_NB is put out in this paper. Traditional biochemical tests are expensive
and time-consuming, making detecting HBPs difficult [10]. A collection of HBPs
from the UniProt database is used in the HBP_NB model, and to extract features, k-
mer approach is used. To reduce dimensionality and choose the best feature collection,
feature selection is used. The chosen characteristics are then used to build the
prediction model using Naive Bayes, which is assessed using Cross validation
approach (cv=10). The accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity of the results--95.45%,
94.17%, and 96.73%--indicate the viability and efficacy of the HBP_NB model.

16. Protein Class Prediction on Count Vectorizer

Machine learning technologies are crucial for sifting through this data for patterns
and characteristics that may be used for stress phenotyping [14]. This study offers
classification of ML tools and best-practice guidelines for the plant community to
successfully employ ML approaches in analyzing biotic and abiotic stress features.
The performance of multinomial NB classifier, KNN, RF, DT, and LR with k-mer
encoding on test data is 93.16% and 93.13%, respectively.

17. DNA sequencing Classification in bioinformatics

An important area of bioinformatics study is the use of AI algorithms to group DNA.
Researchers employ a range of techniques, including multinomial NB, SVM, KNN,
decision trees, random forests, and logistic regression, to categorize DNA sequences
and discover novel genes [17]. The usage of label and k-mer encoding allows these
models to reach an accuracy of about 93% on testing data. These approaches improve
the management of biological information while assisting in identifying the
components of proteins.

      12 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

18. Plant Allergenic Protein Prediction based on sequence

This paper comprehends the allergenic properties of dietary proteins. By combining
supervised and unsupervised machine learning approaches, it is possible to predict if
plant proteins may cause allergic reactions [3]. The method comprises rating
descriptors and evaluating the effectiveness of their categorization. An SVM (support
vector machine) is utilized for partitioning, while a KNN (k-nearest neighbor)
classifier is used for classification. For variable selection and final classification, cv
(cv=5) method is used to validate the KNN classifier. In order to address food
allergies, the study emphasizes the necessity for a reliable and practical protein
classification system.

19. DL model for predicting next-generation sequencing

Researchers have created a DL model to forecast the depth of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) [11]. In three separate Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) panels,
including human SNP, human lncRNA, and non-human sequences for storage of
DNA information, Depth Sequencing was predicted using a DLM with 93% accuracy
for Single nucleotide polymorphisms and 99% accuracy for non-human panels.
Independent testing revealed that the DLM trained on SNP panel correctly predicted
the lncRNA panel 89% of the time.

      13 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                    Table 2.1: Summary of Literature Survey

S.N Techniqu About Applicatio Dataset                        Results Limitations

o        e&   Technique      ns       Used

   Reference

1 RF, DT, RF is an           Protein  UniprotKB/S GNN                        Since just

   and GNN ensemble Classificati wiss-Prot. Accuracy - photosyntheti

   [12].      method; DT on using                            87%.            c bacterial

              is             GNN.                                            proteins were

              classificatio                                                  used, the

              n algorithm,                                                   system

              GNN is a                                                       functions

              gene                                                           well with

              analysis                                                       prokaryotic

              method.                                                        proteins

                                                                             alone.

2 RF SVM, All ML             k-mer-   Los Alamos Kameris This method

   LR, DT methods are HIV1            (LANL)                 accuracy - does not offer

   [16].      used for       genome sub sequence             97%.            a

              classificatio typing.   database.                              justification

              n or                                                           for how a

              regression.                                                    DNA

                                                                             sequence is

                                                                             categorized.

3 XGBoost, Xgboost is a Evaluating Pisum                     XGBoost

   SVM, DT ensemble Plant Gene annotated classifier

   [4].       method. DT Models       gene and               87-90%

              is tree-based Using ML. protein                accuracy.            __

              method,                 dataset from

              svm is an ml            LIS.

              method.

4 LSV         LR & SVM k-mer          inpactorDB F1-Score Reducing the

   Classifier, are linear method to contains                 of 95% . number of

   LR, KN classificatio classify      67,241 LTR                             features won't

   N, NB, n methods LTR-              retrotranspos                          improve the

   DT, RF and KNN is retrotranspo on sequences                               performance

   [7].       a              sons in  from 195                               of the

              classificatio plant     plant species.                         algorithm

              n algorithm. genomes.                                          because

                                                                             processing

                                                                             them can be

                                                                             expensive in

                                                                             terms of CPU

                                                                             power.

   14 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

S.N Techniqu About Applicatio Dataset                       Results Limitations

o        e&   Technique           ns       Used

   Reference

5 CNNl,       CNN is a Plant               Plant        It                   It get the

   ResNet- deep              transcriptio transcription classified three-stage

   based      learning       n factor      factor       transcripti hybrid model

   ProtCNN, algorithm. proteins database. on factor ready to use

   LSTM                      Classificati               proteins of genetic

   [1].                      on of DLM.                 plants with resources,to

                                                        rate of              perform more

                                                        98.23%. efficiently on

                                                                             larger

                                                                             datasets.

6 SVM,        SVM            Sequence- UniportKB/S K-PSSM

   Five-fold method can based              wissProt and TRI-

   cross-     be used for prediction database. PSSM

   validation the classi- of plant                      accuracy

   [13].      fication or vacuole.                      86.49%/87                    __

              regression                                .84%.

              tasks.

7 ANN,        All of these Human           Two          Support Due to the

   SVM,       methods are Protein          datasets:    Vector               imbalance in

   Classificat supervised Sequence Swiss-Prot Machine the dataset,

   ion and learning          Classificati (reviewed accuracy these classes

   Regressio techniques on using protein                of 94%. have poorer

   n tree     and used for ML.             dataset),                         precision and

   [15].      solving                      TrEMBL                            recall values

              classificatio                (unreviewed                       than other

              n.                           dataset).                         classes.

8 MNB,        LR is linear DNA             Gene         Human It cannot

   CNN, LR model,            Sequencing sequence dataset analyse

   [5].       CNN is         Classificati dataset from k=6                   natural data

              used for       on through Kaggle          accuracy in its raw

              image          ml.           containing 3 of 98.4%. form as

              classificatio                text files:                       quickly as

              n purpose.                   chimpanzee,                       Deep

                                           dog, human.                       learning can.

9 XGBoost, These             Protein       Plant-       The

   RF, KNN techniques Classificati mSubP.               ensemble

   [8].       are come on in                            method

              under          Ensemble                   achieved                   __

              ensemble Classifiers.                     an overall

              learning.                                 accuracy

                                                        of 84.85%.

   15 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

S.N Techniqu About Applicatio             Dataset   Results Limitations
                                           Used
o        e&   Technique          ns

   Reference

10 SVM,       RF is an       DNA                    LSTM                     In addition to
                                                    model                    its
   CNN, RFt, ensemble Sequencing                    performed                conventional
                                                    the best                 uses in
   AdaBoost, model, NB using ml                     with                     medicine,
                                                    accuracy                 and
   NBs,       is a           algorithms.            of 99.5%.                diagnosis, it
                                                                             can also be
   KNN,       probabilistic                                                  employed in
                                                                             forensics and
   LSTM       method,                                                        agriculture.

   [6].       KNN is

              used for

              classificatio

              n purposes.

11 CNN,       CNN is         Plant        They      recall                   The PMESP

   KNN, NB deep              electrical designed a curve                     can learn

   [2].       learning       signal       dataset   values are about

              algorithm, classificatio named        96.24% characteristic

              KNN is a n in               PesPPI, it and                     s of electrical

              classificatio biological has 23,214 96.84%. sign data

              n algorithm, mechanism PPIs Pairs                              with different

              NB is a        s.           and 3600                           salt, which

              probabilistic               nodes.                             can truly

              method.                                                        reveal

                                                                             schemes of

                                                                             data.

12 MNB, RF RF is an          Accuracy exploratory They got

   [6].       ensemble Prediction datasets of 98.4%

              method, NB of a sample seven gene accuracy

              is a               DNA families and in                                 __

              Probabilistic sequence. three         multinomi

              method.                     organisms. al naïve

                                                    Bayes.

13 CNN,       The            DNA          Public    CNN -                    LSTM with

   CNN-       mentioned Sequence nucleotide 93.16%. label

   Bidirectio techniques Classificati sequence                               encoding is a

   nal LSTM, are ml          on using database.                              solid choice

   CNN-       algorithms. CNN.                                               for improving

   LSTM                                                                      class recall

   [9].                                                                      and

                                                                             sensitivity.

   16 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

S.N Techniqu About Applicatio             Dataset      Results Limitations
                                           Used
o        e&   Technique           ns

   Reference

14 RF, SVM RF is a           DNA          They chose   In human              In addition to
                                                       dataset               other areas of
   [5].       ensemble Sequence the datasets           accuracy              sequence
                                                       is 86.33%.            recognition,
              model,         Classificati from UCI                           it can be used
                                                                             to classify
              SVM is         on using K- ML                                  protein
                                                                             sequence
              method that mer.            Repository                         data.

              can be used                 of humans.

              for

              classificatio

              n

15 NB, RF,    NB use         Prediction   From         Hormone-              Collection of
       LR     Bayesian       of           UniProt      Binding               training and
       [10].  probability    Hormone-     database,    Proteins_             test set trials
              for            Binding      they         Naive                 required(due
              modeling       Proteins.    collected    Bayes                 to tiny
              task, LR is                 hormone-     accuracy              dataset).
              Linear                      binding      of 94.17%.
              model.                      proteins.

16 SVM,       SVM & LR Protein            They         k-mer

   KNN, RF, are linear Class              generated    encoding

   DT, LR, models,DT Prediction real-time              on test               __

   MNB        is a tree- on Count data of              data they

   [14].      based          Vectorizer. remote-       got

              method, RF                  sensing      93.16%.

              is an                       , velocity.

              ensemble

              method.

17 KNN,       KNN & DT DNA                Public       SVM,

   SVM,       are used for Sequencing nucleotide KNN --

   MNB, RF, classificatio classificatio sequence 93%.

   LR, DT n purpose, n in                 database.

   [17].      NB is a        bioinformat                                     __

              probabilistic ics.

              method.

   17 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
             PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

S.N Techniqu About Applicatio           Dataset  Results Limitations
                                         Used
o        e&   Technique          ns

   Reference

18 SVM,       SVM &       Prediction They        SVM

   KNN, NB, KNN used of Plant           gathered 954 accuracy

   RF         for         Allergenic food        of 93%

   [3].       classifica- Proteins: allergens and compared

              tion, NB is ML            nonallergens. to KNN,                __

              a           Classificati           RF, and

              probabilistic on.                  NB.

              method, RF

              is a ml

              method.

19 CNN,       LR & SVM Predicting DNA            They got Limited the

   ANN,       are linear next           interaction 93% for inputs to a

   SVM, LR models,        generation kinetics rate SNP and minimal set

   [11].      ANN is a sequencing constants 99%                              of local

              neural      using         and NGS accuracy variables that

              network, DLM.             sequencing for non- can be

              CNN is a                  depth.   human                       automatically

              DL                                 panels. computed

              algorithm.                                                     using DNA

                                                                             sequence.

   18 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
         Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                              CHAPTER 3

PROPOSED METHODOLOGY

3.1 Problem Statement

Build a robust classification model that correctly maps amino acid sequences to
protein families within the PlantGDB Database [1]. In this study, several models were
used to solve the above problem. The model analyzes the input sequence data and
predicts the protein class it belongs to with high accuracy and precision utilizing
Machine Learning algorithms. By proposing an efficient and automated approach for
protein family classification, this work aims to improve knowledge of protein
structure and function.

3.2 Dataset Description

PlantGDB [1] is a data repository containing different plant species' genome

sequences. In addition to sequence data, it also provides alignments and annotations.

`Prunus persica [peach] genome' [2] taken from [1]. From [2], peptide file

(Ppersica_139_peptide.fa.gz)  and  the   annotation                          file

(Ppersica_139_annotation_info.text.gz) were considered as shown in Fig 3.2.

19 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

            Figure 3.1: PlantGDB ­ Homepage ( http://plantgdb.org/ )

                Figure 3.2: Peach Genome (http://plantgdb.org/PeGDB/)
20 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

      Technology Srinagar
            PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                      Plant GDB

                      Extraction of Genome [Peach]
               Data format conversion from FASTA into CSV
Preparation of experimental data from peptide sequence and its annotation

            Identification of # of classes i.e., 34 plant protein types

            Input Sequence Representation k-mer counting                   Visualisation
                                                                         (Target Variable)

            Splitting the data for Training and Testing                  Encoding Target Variable
                                                                              [Label Encoding]

 Logistic   Decision  KNN        Multinomial                             SVM      Ensemble
Regression    Tree                    NB                                          Learning

                                                                         Bagging  Boosting

                                                                      Random Forest AdaBoost XGBoost

                                    Performance evaluation

                                       Results Comparison
                             Figure 3.3: Detailed Workflow
21 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

3.3 Detailed Architecture

3.3.1 Dataset Preparation

     The Peptide file considered for preparing data is in FASTA format and it
         needs to be changed to CSV format for applying Machine Learning
         algorithms. For reading the FASTA file SeqIO.parse() function from
         BioPython Library is used. Extracted required attributes, stored them in a
         pandas data frame, and finally saved them in a file named `peptide_data.csv'
         as shown in Fig 3.4.

                                Figure 3.4: Peptide File Conversion (.fa to .csv)
     The annotation file was in text format(tab-separated). Read the file, convert it

         into pandas dataframe, and finally save it to a CSV file named
         `annotation_info.csv' as shown in Fig 3.5.

      22 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                        Figure 3.5: Annotation File Conversion (.txt to .csv)
 The problem statement lies in classifying amino acid sequences into protein

    families. Extract relevant features such as Sequence and ID columns from
    `peptide_file.csv' and Protein families (Defline) and Transcript name columns
    from `annotation_file.csv'. Merge these two files to make a single dataset
    named `filtered_data.csv' based on common identifiers present in both files
    (ID and Transcript name) respectively. Protein class labels were extracted
    based on their occurrence count of at least 50 counts (count>=50), the
    required condition to choose labels, and their corresponding sequence and id.
    The final dataset named `filtered_data.csv' consists of 3824 sequence samples
    over 34 different protein classes as shown in Table 1[3][4].

                              Figure 3.6: Final Dataset (filtered_data.csv)

 23 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
       Technology Srinagar
      PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

      Table 3.1: Class Label Description

S.No             Class Label                             Significance
  1   'C2 domain-containing protein'                 Membrane Targeting

2     'DNA binding'                                  Homologous recombination

                                                     and Genome maintenance

3 'DNAJ heat shock N-terminal domain-containing      Chaperone binding, heat

      protein'                                       shock protein binding

4     'F-box family protein'                         Responsible for vegetative

                                                     and reproductive growth

5 'FRS5 (FAR1-related sequence 5); zinc ion binding' Regulate DNA transcription

6     'GDSL-motif lipase/hydrolase family protein'   Lipid metabolism

7 'RNA recognition motif (RRM)-containing protein'   Binding RNA

8     'UDP-glucoronosyl/UDP-glucosyl transferase     Involved in UDP glucosyl

      family protein'                                transferase activity

9     'Ankyrin repeat family protein'                Involved in mediating

                                                     protein-protein interactions

10    'Aspartyl protease family protein'             Protein Degradation

11 'Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family protein'    Transcription regulation
                                                     Control Gene Regulation
12    'binding'
                                                         Defense Signaling
13    'Disease resistance family protein'             Pathogen Recognition

14 'Disease resistance protein (CC-NBS-LRR class),       Immune response
                                 putative'              Defense activation

15    'Disease resistance protein (NBS-LRR class),

      putative'

16 'Disease resistance protein (TIR-NBS-LRR class),
                                 putative'

      24 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
      PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

S.No  Class Label                                         Significance

17    'hAT dimerization domain-containing protein'        Gene expression Regulation

18    'Hydroxyproline-rich glycoprotein family protein'   Cell wall modification

19 'Leucine-rich repeat family protein / protein kinase Regulates shoot and root growth
                                family protein'

20 'Leucine-rich repeat transmembrane protein kinase,     Innate immunity in plants
                                    putative'

21    'Nucleic acid binding'                              Gene regulation

22    'Nucleic acid binding / ribonuclease H'             Catalyse RNA cleavage

23    'Oxidoreductase, 2OG-Fe (II) oxygenase family       Protein and Nucleic acid
                                                                 modification
      protein'
                                                                Editing RNA
24 'Pentatricopeptide (PPR) repeat-containing protein'

25    'Protein binding / zinc ion binding'                Regulate growth and stress
                                                              adaptation in plants
26    'Protein kinase family protein'
                                                          Respond to environmental
27    'Protein kinase, putative'                                      stresses

                                                          Regulate biological activity

28 'Reverse transcriptase, putative / RNA-dependent DNA Responsible for transcriptional

      polymerase, putative'                               and post-transcriptional gene

                                                          silencing

29 'Short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) family      Metabolic regulation

      protein'

30    'Transducin family protein / WD-40 repeat family    Nucleotide-binding

      protein'

31    'Transferase family protein'                        Involved in transferase activity

32 'Zinc finger (C3HC4-type RING finger) family protein'  ATP and Zinc ion binding

33    'Zinc finger protein-related'                       Regulate growth and Stress
                                                                    adaptation
34    'Zinc knuckle (CCHC-type) family protein'
                                                           Nucleic acid and zinc ion
                                                                     binding

      25 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

3.4. K-mer Encoding

When processing the Genome sequence, conversion from string format to numerical

value is necessary, to form a matrix input for model training. The features of the

existing sequence encoding methods are shown in Table 2.

Table 3.2: Sequence Encoding Methods

Encoding Method      Features

Sequential encoding  Encodes each character into a numeric value.

One-hot encoding     Represents the categorical to binary value mapping in
 K-mer encoding                        a binary vector format.

                      Divide the sequence into k-length overlapping short
                                       sequences or segments

The problem that exists in the methods(other than k-mer encoding) mentioned above
in Table 2 does not result in vectors of uniform length, which is the required
condition to feed data to an algorithm (classification or regression). For the other two
methods, we have to curtail or fill with "n" or "0" to meet the requirement.

                           Figure 3.7: 4-mer representation

26 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

3.5 Algorithms Used

Algorithm 1: Label Encoder

Input: Target Variable (y)
Output: Encoded Target Variable (y_encoded)
Method
Import the necessary libraries
Initialize an instance of the LabelEncoder class as le
for each y

    Call the fit_transform () method on the le object, passing y as the
argument, and assign the transformed values to a new variable

  y_encoded=le.fit_transform(y).
return the encoded target variable (y_encoded).

Algorithm 2: K-mer Technique

Input: Amino acid string sequence
Output: Numeric N-gram representation (N=4)
Method
Divide the amino acid sequence into overlapping segments of length K (k=6).
//create the BOW model using CountVectorizer()
Convert list of kmers into string sentences of words
for each n-gram

       count the frequency
return the document-term matrix representation.

      27 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Algorithm 3: Logistic Regression

 Input:
     A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is
       represented as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label
       represented as , 1    34.

 Output:
     Classifier Model 1

 Method

  Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
  Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
  Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
  Initialize the logistic regression model with the desired hyperparameters.
  Training the classifier.
  Evaluate the trained C1 model using the testing data.
  Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 4: Decision Tree

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 2

Method
 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.

      28 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the Decision Tree model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier.
 Evaluate the trained C2 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 5: K-Nearest Neighbor

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 3

Method

 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the KNN model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier.
 Evaluate the trained C3 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 6: Multinomial Naive Bayes

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 4

Method

 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
      29 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the Multinomial NB model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier.
 Evaluate the trained C4 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 7: Support Vector Machine

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 5

Method
 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the SVM model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier.
 Evaluate the trained C5 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

      30 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Algorithm 8: Random Forest

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 6

Method
 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.

 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.

 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).

 Initialize the Random Forest model with the desired hyperparameters.

 Training the classifier.

 Evaluate the trained C6 model using the testing data.

 Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 9: AdaBoost

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:

   Classifier Model 7
Method
 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.

 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
      31 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the AdaBoost model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier..
 Evaluate the trained C7 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

Algorithm 10: XGBoost

Input:
   A set of protein sequence,  = {1, 2, .... , } where sequence is represented
     as , 1     and  = || with its corresponding label represented
     as , 1    34.

Output:
   Classifier Model 8

Method
 Encode Sequence Data using the K-mer Technique.
 Encode Protein labels using a label encoding technique.
 Data Splitting for Training and Testing Purposes (DTrain = 80, DTest = 20).
 Initialize the XGBoost model with the desired hyperparameters.
 Training the classifier.
 Evaluate the trained C8 model using the testing data.
 Assess the model's performance.

      32 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                        CHAPTER 4

                 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1 Evaluation Metrics

To examine the ML model's performance, evaluation metrics are used. Below are the
few evaluation metrics considered for this classification task.

4.1.1 Confusion Matrix

It is a table that represents the following four values: TPs, TNs, FPs, and FNs. It is

used in examining the model's performance and identify the specific errors or

misclassifications in protein labeling.

                                         0  1

                        TP                  TN

                 0

                 1      FP                  FN

4.1.2 Accuracy

Measures the overall correctness of the model's predictions for protein labels.

                 Accuracy = TP+TN / (TP+TN+FP+FN)  eq 4.1

4.1.3 Precision

Measures the proportion of correctly predicted positive protein labels out of all
samples that are predicted as positive, the focus is on positive prediction accuracy.

                 Precision = TP / (TP+FP)          eq 4.2

4.1.4 Recall

Measures the proportion of correctly predicted positive protein labels out of actual
instances of a specific protein.

      33 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                Recall = TP / (TP+FN)  eq 4.3

4.1.5 F1-score

Measures the model's accuracy considering both precision and recall (harmonic
mean).

F1-score = 2 * (precision * recall) / (precision + recall) eq 4.4

4.2 Experimental Evaluation Using Entire Dataset (with
34 classes)

The dataset used to train is "filtered_data.csv" prepared by taking files from [1]
database. Detailed dataset preparation is mentioned in section 3.3.1. The dataset
consists of 3824 sequence samples over 34 different protein classes as shown in Table
1. For implementation python language is used and 8 Machine learning algorithms
were considered which were explained in section 3.5.

                                Fig 4.1 Evaluation metric scores of all models
From various plots obtained as shown from above figures, it is shown that
Multinomial Naïve Bayes outperformed other metods.

      34 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                                  (a) Confusion Matrix - LR

                                     (b) Confusion Matrix - DT

                               (c) Confusion Matrix - KNN
35 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

      Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                       (d) Confusion Matrix ­ Multinomial NB

                               (e) Confusion Matrix - SVM

                              (f) Confusion Matrix - RF
36 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                                        (g) Confusion Matrix - AdaBoost

                                       (h) Confusion Matrix - XGBoost
                                 Fig 4.2 Confusion Matrix of all classes
The amount of true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives are
displayed in the confusion matrices for each of these models, providing a detailed
analysis of how effectively they were able to categorise plant proteins using k-mer
encoding. With the use of these matrices, different models' performance in this
classification job may be assessed and compared.
      37 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

4.3 Divided Datasets Evaluation

From confusion matrix plots of various classifiers, it is clearly shown that classes 21,
23, and 3 were assigned to most of the instances. Therefore, the dataset is split into
two parts and was trained separately such that one dataset comprises classes 21, 23,
and 3. And other dataset comprises of remaining 31 classes. The results from the two
different datasets were shown below.
Dataset 1(D1) - [3: 'F-box family protein', 21: 'nucleic acid binding/ribonuclease H',
23: 'pentatricopeptide (PPR) repeat-containing protein']
Dataset 2(D2) ­ [`Remaining 31 labels']

                                       Fig 4.3 Accuracy plots [D1] [D2]

    Accuracy plots show how each model's classification accuracy changes as a
    function of different parameters or hyperparameter settings. They aid in
    identifying the ideal setups for improving the precision of plant protein
    classification using k-mer encoding, making it feasible to select the most
    appropriate model for the task with knowledge.

      38 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                                      Fig 4.4 Precision plots [D1] [D2]
The precision scores for each model are displayed on precision plots as a function
of the parameters or hyperparameter settings. They aid in identifying the best
setups for increasing the precision of plant protein classification by k-mer
encoding, enabling informed decisions about the most suitable model for the task
at hand.

                                        Fig 4.5 Recall plots [D1] [D2]
 39 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

       Technology Srinagar
               PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023
Recall plots display how various parameter or hyperparameter settings affect each
model's recall scores. It is feasible to choose the most appropriate model for the
task by employing them to help determine the optimum configurations for getting
higher recall in plant protein categorization using k-mer encoding.

                                      Fig 4.6 F1-score plots [D1] [D2]
F1-score graphs demonstrate the effects of changing parameters or
hyperparameter settings on the F1-scores of each model. They aid in figuring out
the best setups for getting higher F1-scores when classifying plant proteins using
k-mer encoding, making the choice of a model more informed.

 40 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
       Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

(a) Confusion Matrix - LR[D1]   (b) Confusion Matrix - DT[D1]

(c) Confusion Matrix - KNN[D1]  (d) Confusion Matrix - MNB[D1]

(e) Confusion Matrix - SVM[D1]  (f) Confusion Matrix - RF[D1]

  (g) Confusion Matrix - AdaBoost[D1] (h) Confusion Matrix - XGBoost[D1]

                                 Fig 4.7 Confusion Matrix of all classes[D1]

41 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                             (a) Confusion Matrix - LR[D2]

                              (b) Confusion Matrix - DT[D2]

                             (c) Confusion Matrix - KNN[D2]
42 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

      Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                             (d) Confusion Matrix - MNB[D2]

                                (e) Confusion Matrix - SVM[D2]

                               (f) Confusion Matrix - RF[D2]
43 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of

      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                                    (g) Confusion Matrix - AdaBoost[D2]

                                      (h) Confusion Matrix - XGBoost[D2]
                                    Fig 4.8 Confusion Matrix of all classes[D2]
The confusion matrices on Datasets 1 and 2 for each model provide a thorough
breakdown of each model's performance in the k-mer encoding-based categorization
of plant proteins. They help with comparing and evaluating the efficacy of various
models on diverse datasets by showing the amount of true positives, true negatives,
false positives, and false negatives for each example.

      44 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Evaluation Metric Results:

                     Table 4.1 Evaluation Metric Results

Model | Metric (%)   Accuracy   Precision  Recall              F1-score
Logistic Regression      53         91       53                    61
                         50         83       50                    54
   Decision Tree         15         79       15                    15
         KNN             61         94       61                    68
                         24         51       24                    18
  Multinomial NB         45         87       45                    49
         SVM             17         17       17                    10
                         33         47       33                    33
   Random Forest
      AdaBoost                                                 F1-score
      XGBoost                                                      60
                                                                   62
                     Table 4.2 Evaluation Metric Results ­ D1      11
                                                                   22
Model | Metric (%)   Accuracy Precision Recall                     73
Logistic Regression                                                46
                            63  81         63                      38
   Decision Tree                                                   59
         KNN                66  80         66

  Multinomial NB            12  26         12
         SVM
                            21  92         21
   Random Forest
      AdaBoost              76  70         76
      XGBoost
                            56  77         56

                            53  35         53

                            64  79         64

                     Table 4.3 Evaluation Metric Results ­ D2

Model | Metric (%)   Accuracy   Precision  Recall              F1-score
Logistic Regression      50         90       50                    55
                         50         88       50                    55
   Decision Tree         15         81       15                    21
         KNN             66         90       66                    72
                         27         57       27                    25
  Multinomial NB         42         83       42                    47
         SVM             16         21       16                    12
                         34         51       34                    34
   Random Forest
      AdaBoost
      XGBoost

From Table 4.2 and 4.3 results, it is shown that Support Vector Machine (SVM)
outperformed in Dataset 1 and Multinomial NB outperformed in Dataset 2.

45 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

46 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                            CHAPTER 5
          CONCLUSION and FUTURE WORKS

This project involves evaluating various classifiers, where Multinomial Naive Bayes
(NB) achieved the highest accuracy. Notably, three classes (3, 21, and 23) were
consistently assigned to most instances based on the confusion matrices. To delve
deeper into this phenomenon, the dataset was divided into two parts: one comprising
the frequently assigned classes and the other comprising the remaining classes. In
dataset one, Support Vector Machine (SVM) exhibited the best performance, while
Multinomial NB outperformed other models in dataset two.

Future work involves optimizing accuracy by exploring additional classifiers such as
deep learning models like Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) and fine-tuning
existing models. Additionally, investigating alternative feature representation
techniques and incorporating additional biological or contextual features can
contribute to enhanced classification performance. The project's outcomes have
practical implications in phenotyping, facilitating advancements in crop improvement,
disease resistance, and overall plant breeding strategies.

      47 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

48 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
                         PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                             REFERENCES

1. Oncul, A. B., & Celik, Y. (2023). Signal, Image and Video Processing, 17(5), 2055-
    2061.

2. Yao, Jiepeng, Yi Ling, Peichen Hou, Zhongyi Wang, Lan Huang. A graph neural
    network model for deciphering the biological mechanisms of plant electrical signal
    classification. Applied Soft Computing 137 (2023): 110153.

3. Nedyalkova, Miroslava, Sergio Madurga, Marek Tobiszewski, Vasil Simeonov.
    Sequence-Based Prediction of Plant Allergenic Proteins: Machine Learning
    Classification Approach. ACS Omega (2023).

4. Upadhyaya, Shriprabha R., Philipp E. Bayer, Cassandria G. Tay Fernandez, Jakob
    Petereit, Jacqueline Batley, Mohammed Bennamoun, Farid Boussaid, David Edwards.
    Evaluating Plant Gene Models Using Machine Learning. Plants 11.12 (2022): 1619

5. Juneja, Sapna, Annu Dhankhar, Abhinav Juneja, Shivani Bali. An Approach to DNA
    Sequence Classification Through Machine Learning: DNA Sequencing, K Mer
    Counting, Thresholding, Sequence Analysis. International Journal of Reliable and
    Quality E-Healthcare (IJRQEH) 11.2 (2022): 1-15.

6. Vigil, MS Antony, M. Mirutuhula, Sure Sarvagna, R. Supraja, and Gadusunari
    Priyanka Reddy. DNA Sequencing Using Machine Learning Algorithms. In 2022
    International Conference on Data Science, Agents & Artificial Intelligence
    (ICDSAAI), vol. 1, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2022.

7. Orozco-Arias, Simon, Mariana S. Candamil-Cortés, Paula A. Jaimes, Johan S. Piña,
    Reinel Tabares-Soto, Romain Guyot, and Gustavo Isaza. K-mer-based machine
    learning method to classify LTR-retrotransposons in plant genomes. PeerJ 9 (2021):
    e11456.Wattanapornprom, Warin, et al. "Ensemble of multiple classifiers for
    multilabel classification of plant protein subcellular localization." Life 11.4 (2021):
    293.

          49 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
                 Technology Srinagar
                         PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

8. Gunasekaran, Hemalatha, K. Ramalakshmi, A. Rex Macedo Arokiaraj, S. Deepa
    Kanmani, Chandran Venkatesan, and C. Suresh Gnana Dhas. Analysis of DNA
    sequence classification using CNN and hybrid models. Computational and
    Mathematical Methods in Medicine 2021 (2021).

9. Guo, Yuxin, Liping Hou, Wen Zhu, and Peng Wang. Prediction of Hormone-Binding
    Proteins Based on K-mer Feature Representation and Naive Bayes. Frontiers in
    Genetics 12 (2021): 797641.

10. Zhang, Jinny X., Boyan Yordanov, Alexander Gaunt, Michael X. Wang, Peng Dai,
    Yuan-Jyue Chen, Kerou Zhang et al. A deep learning model for predicting next-
    generation sequencing depth from DNA sequence. Nature communications 12, no. 1
    (2021): 4387.

11. Sangphukieo, Apiwat, Teeraphan Laomettachit, and Marasri Ruengjitchatchawalya.
    Photosynthetic protein classification using genome neighborhood-based machine
    learning feature. Scientific Reports 10, no. 1 (2020): 7108.

12. Yadav, A. K., & Singla, D. (2020). VacPred: Sequence-based prediction of plant
    vacuole proteins using machine-learning techniques. Journal of biosciences, 45, 1-9.

13. Sekhar, S. M., Siddesh, G. M., Raj, M., & Manvi, S. S. (2021). Protein class
    prediction based on Count Vectorizer and long short term memory. International
    Journal of Information Technology, 13(1), 341-348.

14. Gupta, C. P., Bihari, A., & Tripathi, S. (2019). Human Protein Sequence
    Classification using Machine Learning and Statistical Classification Techniques. Int.
    J. Recent Technol. Eng, 8(2).

15. Solis-Reyes, S., Avino, M., Poon, A., & Kari, L. (2018). An open-source k-mer based
    machine learning tool for fast and accurate subtyping of HIV-1 genomes. PloS one,
    13(11), e0206409.

16. Phan, D., Ngoc, G. N., Lumbanraja, F. R., Faisal, M. R., Abipihi, B., Purnama, B., ...
    & Satou, K. (2017). Combined use of k-mer numerical features and position-specific
    categorical features in fixed-length DNA sequence classification. Journal of
    Biomedical Science and Engineering, 10(8), 390-401.

          50 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
                 Technology Srinagar
                         PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023
17. Gotoh, O., Morita, M., & Nelson, D. R. (2014). Assessment and refinement of

    eukaryotic gene structure prediction with gene-structure-aware multiple protein
    sequence alignment. Bmc Bioinformatics, 15(1), 1-13.
18. http://plantgdb.org/ - "PlantGDB [Genome Database]" [14/06/2023]
19. http://plantgdb.org/PeGDB/ - "Prunus persica [Peach] Genome" [14/06/2023]
20. https://www.uniprot.org/ - "UniProt Database" [14/06/2023]
21. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ - "PubMed Repository" [14/06/2023]

          51 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
                 Technology Srinagar
              PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

52 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
      Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

                           APPENDIX A

Input Sequence:
MLITAHFIDGEWNLHKRVLNFCVIANHKGNSIGKLLETCLLHWDLKKILAITT
DNTSSNTKAIDYLKSKMGHWKNGSLVLEGKYTHVRCCAHIVNLIVQDGLKK
LEKSILSIRNAVRYVFYNMTLKMSISLYLASHTTFYNLIAMEGEIGDLFFGDQL
PSQTHTSTILKDIACSMKMKFEKYWIDLDKVNQLLMVAHVLDPRYLTDPIEK
VIPNFDIFKWWKLNGVKYPGLSLIAKDVLDIPSSTVISESFFAQVVNSFCTFLT
PKIVEALICSQN
Length: 276
Predicted Label: ['DNA binding']

Input Sequence:
MSSESSATTAAAAESHAPLLLPRQASSGRDSSDLGSPTARPATLAMLLGRAT
GRRGPSMLVRETAARELDERRADWGYSKPVVALDMMWNTAFVVVSVAML
IWTDHEHPNTPIRLWICGYALQCFVHVVLVWVEYQRRNNIARRISRRNQDAQ
QNQHQVEIDANDTDDEEAAAAARDLAISTRSSLSKRCETVNTMASFLWWIV
GFYWVVAGGEVLLQNAPRLYWLAVVFLAFDVFFAIFCVVLACLIGVALCCC
LPCIIAILYAVAGQEGASDADLSILPKYRFRSSSEEKSSVGAGKMIPVETSSGY
LAIERILLPEDAECCICLSPYEDGTELHTLPCNHHFHATCIVKWLKMNATCPL
CKYNILKGNEPV
Length: 374
Predicted Label: ['zinc finger (C3HC4-type RING finger) family protein']

                            Multinomial Naive Bayes Predictions

      53 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Input Sequence:
MAFPEHLTADILSRLPAKSLVRFSSVRKEWQALIRDPHFISQHLNLNIAKEDQS
GRLLVKYRCNVTRKNVISLLLHGTHGYMLSKLEIPSSVMDSHHLKLVGSCNG
LLCLAHDKSAHLWSPMILLWNPAIREFSVLPDSVIDSVNDDDNVQARGIAHG
FGYHPLIDDYKVVRIVSLSCFGNAWIRAEVYSSKMDCWQEVNTFHFEIYEHS
CTALNGLLYWIAYGKGDRELIVSFDMCDDVFGELQLPDLSFLDTPMCTKLAE
LKQSLYLIVYTFSGRQREIYVWKMIEHDAEVFWKREWTIGPLLGIERPLGCGL
YGEIYMESRKGDLVLYNPSSEEAKHIPICGLRCSLEVHFYVESLVSTKGQREV
LQETNKRIM
Length: 377
Predicted Label: ['F-box family protein']

Input Sequence:
MVSRQIQLLIQRSSSAAHLLQLHSLVLKTGLDHNPNFVSHYIYAACSISVEFSK
LVFDHIPIKPPLFAWNSIIRAFTNSSNPLESLNFFFQLHRIGLKPDNFTYPFVLK
ACGRCSIVGVGGPVHSLILKVGFDSDRYIRNTLLRMYAACGAIRLARRVFDE
MTVRDVVSWSSMIAGYVACNCPLDAFKVFQDMKLANENPNSVTLVSLLSAC
TRLLNFRAGESIHCYIVVNCIGIDVALGTALLEMYSKCGHVEKAFQVFNSMSE
KNLQSWTIMISGLPDHGHGKDAISLFTRMEQTGLVPDSMSFSAILSACSHLGL
VHKGRQFFNQMVRTYGIQPTLEHYGCLVDLLGRAGLIEEAYEIIKNMPMEPN
SVILRSFLCACRNHGVAITLDDKLRKLLISEPNLGANYVLAASVSSLSGCWND
AADLRVAMKQNGLVKVPGCSWVEVGGGGSTAATINEPLV
Length: 462
Predicted Label: ['pentatricopeptide (PPR) repeat-containing protein']

                           SVM Predictions - Dataset 1(3 Classes)

      54 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
                    PLANT PROTEIN CLASSIFICATION USING K-MER ENCODING 2023

Input Sequence:
MFLRQAAANLIKRRFRLPSQTVSSTSGTTTIPLSSRTKFSYQYHGPKDFSWRM
NYSHRDPRVWLFLSGNAAIIFTIHSNTVLAKDASIESSPENDTEGAEAMGLRKI
EDGSVISNIHTSKWRVFTDKGRDLFLQERILCLHSFGKLEEAEKLFLLALQEA
KEGFGERDPHVASACNNLAELYRVNKAYNKAEPLYLDAISILEESFGPEDIRIS
THSLFLYYL
Length: 223
Predicted Label: ['nucleic acid binding']

Input Sequence:
MVQILHISTTTVRPTTQDDQLTAPKIELTPWDLRLIQFDYIQKGILFHKSAETE
DSNVSLVQRLKDSLSLTLNIFYPLAGRLVVSENAEDSTVSISIKCNGAGAEFV
HAAADGVKVADILNPYIPDHVIFNLFSLNEVRNYEGVSKPLLSAQVTELLDGI
FIGCSLNHLVADGTSFWHFFNTWAEISRSGSHKILQPRPVFGRQFLDGVIDLPV
HLPFSYSEIIGEPIIKSSSFNAFLQRVVFHFPKEKIAKLKAKANAEMGTTSNISSL
QALMAHLWQATTRARHLQPDQQVNYRFAIGLRQRWEPETLPKEYLGTAIIG
VNVTAIASELLQNGLGWAASQINKKISSLTPEQARNDLVDWVNKPTLIPNMR
NPTLLARLLTGSSPRFNVYGNDFGWGRPLAVRSGAGDKMDGKLTVFPGAEE
GSIDFEACLLPETIQTMMDDAEFMEAVA
Length: 452
Predicted Label: ['transferase family protein']

                          Multinomial NB Predictions - Dataset 2

      55 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of
            Technology Srinagar
